JL_tutorial_4_5 (#351)
nens/threedi-docs: source/e_2d_flood_tutorial.rst

..  _flood_model:

Tutorial 4: Building a dike breach flood model
==============================================

Introduction
-------------
In this tutorial, you are going to build a model that simulates a flood caused by a potential breach. The model will be built using the :ref:`3Di Modeller Interface <mi_what_is>`. At the end of this tutorial, you will have a basic working model that you can run simulations with.

> Our area of interest is the municipality of Nissewaard on the island of Voorne-Putten in the Netherlands. The municipality of Nissewaard consists of urban area and farmland. While this tutorial represents a real-world area, it is important to keep in mind that some processes will be simplified for the purpose of this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our area of interest is the municipality of Nissewaard on the island of Voorne-Putten in the Netherlands. The municipality of Nissewaard consists of urban area and farmland. While this tutorial represents a real-world area, it is important to note that some processes have been simplified for the purpose of this tutorial.
```

#) Fill in the value '3' for the *crest level* of the dike, then click *OK*.

#)  Click the *Toggle editing mode* button in the toolbar to exit editing mode and save your edits to this layer.

.. _adding_potential_breach:

Potential Breach (1D-2D)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Now that we have incorporated a connected channel into our model, the next step is to introduce a potential breach location. This breach acts as a link between the 1D and 2D aspects of the model. In our scenario, the potential breach will simulate a dike breach, allowing water from the channel to flow into the fields behind the dike. For more theoretical information on breaches, see: :ref:`breaches`. 

See the :ref:`t4reference-image` for a reference where to draw the potential brach:

#) In the *Layers* panel, in the *1D2D* group, click the *Potential breach* layer.

#) Click the *Toggle editing mode* button (|toggle_editing|) in the top left.

#) Click on the *Add line feature* button (|add_line|).

#) Hover over your channel until a pink square appears. Click on the pink square. Now click on the other side of the dike. Right-click to stop drawing.

#) Fill in the following parameters:

>    * ID: filled in automatically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   * ID: <filled in automatically>
```

   * Code: a name to identify your potential breach
   * Display name: a name to identify your potential breach
   * Exchange level [m MSL]: 4
   * Max breach depth [m]: 1
   * Levee material: Sand
   * Channel ID: filled in automatically

#) Click *OK*.

#) Click the *Toggle editing mode* button in the toolbar and save your edits to this layer.

> The 'Exchange level' represents the water level that the channel must reach to initiate a breach and exchange water. Additionally, a breach can also be "opened", similar to creating a hole in a dike. The 'Max breach depth' signifies the maximum depth of this opening, measured from the top of the dike.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 'Exchange level' represents the water level that the channel must reach to initiate a breach. Additionally, a breach can also be "opened", similar to creating a hole in a dike. The 'Max breach depth' signifies the maximum depth of the breach, measured from the top of the dike.
```
I don't understand what you mean by the opening of a breach (creating a hole in a dike)..

Author: als in dat een breach ook gemaakt kan worden zoals een gat in de dijk en het niet alleen maar een overstroming hoeft te zijn.

.. VRAAG: klopt deze uitleg een beetje?

The final result should look something like this, with the location of the channel (blue), the boundary conditions (purple), the dike obstacle (brown), and the potential breach (black) from the channel to the field behind the dike:

.. _t4reference:

.. _t4reference-image:

.. figure:: image/t_04_reference.png
    :alt: Reference image
    :scale: 50%
    

>     Refrence image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Reference image.
```

Adding a channel outside of the DEM to the schematisation
-----------------------------------------------------------

> A channel can also be added to the schematisation while it is outside of the DEM, so outside of the modelled area. When you want to do this you need to add a :ref:`exchange_line`. This line will link the 1D channel element to the 2D area of the map. Follow these step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A channel can also be added to the schematisation if it is outside of the DEM. If you want to do this you need to add an :ref:`exchange_line`. This line will link the 1D channel to the 2D domain of the DEM. Follow these steps:
```

> #) Add a channel in the same way as you did in :ref:`adding_a_channel`, but this time the channel may be outside of the DEM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#) Add a channel like you did in :ref:`adding_a_channel`, but this time the channel has to be located outside of the DEM.
```

#) Add the boundary conditions in the same way as you did in :ref:`adding_boundary_conditions`.

#) In the *Layers* panel, in the *1D2D* group, click the *Exchange line* layer.

#) Click the *Toggle editing mode* button (|toggle_editing|) in the top left.

#) Click on the *Add line feature* button (|add_line|).

> #) draw your exchange line parallel to your channel. Ensure that the exchange line remains within the Digital Elevation Model (DEM). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#) Draw the exchange line parallel to your channel. Ensure that the exchange line remains within the DEM. 
```

#) Right-click to stop drawing the Exchange line. A popup screen with the Feature Attributes should now appear.

#) Fill in the following parameters in the *channel* tab:

    * ID: filled in automatically
    * Code: give a name you can identify it by
    * Exchange level [m]: leave empty

>     * Channel ID: ID of the channel outside of the DEM (2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Channel ID: ID of the channel outside of the DEM
```

#) Click the upload button (|upload|) in the 3Di Models and Simulations panel.

#) In the dialog that has appeared, click *New upload* and click *Next*.

#) Click *Check schematisation*. This will check your schematisations for any errors that make it impossible to generate a valid 3Di model and simulation template.

#) Continue to the next screen. Here you have to fill in a commit message that describes the changes your have made relative to the previous revision. For example: "Added channel with potential breach".

#) Click *Start upload*. Check if it is the upload is successful and if the uploaded data is successfully processed into a 3Di model.  

Your 3Di model is now ready for simulation! The model is now also available on `3Di Live <https://www.3di.live/>`_ and the `management screens <https://management.3di.live>`_.

Running a simulation 
----------------------

You will now start a simulation with the 3Di model you have created in the 3Di Modeller Interface: 

#) In the 3Di Models and Simulations panel, click *Simulate* (|simulate|) > *New simulation*.  

> #) Select your model and simulation template and click *Next*. A new dialog opens with several options for your simulation.  

Author: yes!

> #) Check the box for *Include breaches* (keep *Include initial conditions* and * Include boundary conditions* checked). Click *Next*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#) Check the box *Include breaches* (keep *Include initial conditions* and *Include boundary conditions* checked). Click *Next*.
```

#) Give your simulation a name. Click *Next*.

#) Set the duration of your simulation to 4 hours. Click *Next*.

#) Accept the Boundary conditions as they are by clicking *Next*.

#) Accept the Initial conditions as they are by clicking *Next*.

#) Fill in the following parameters for Breaches and then click *Next*.

    * ID of breach: 1 (if your model only contains 1 breach)

>     * Duration till max depth: 0.100 hours

Reviewer: Is it 'till' of 'until'. until is the formal form and should be used (if that's not the case, I'd open a ticket).

Author: er moet een ticket worden aangemaakt

#) Accept the simulation settings as they are by clicking *Next*. 

#) Check the summary of your simulation and click *Add to queue*.  

The 'Duration till max depth' refers to the time it takes for the breach to reach its maximum depth after it starts forming. The speed at which the maximum width of the breach is attained depends on the material properties. As for the 'Start after' parameter, it is set to begin one hour after the start of the simulation.

Your simulation will start as soon as a calculation node is available for your organisation. Note: the number of available calculation nodes depends on your 3Di subscription. 

In the 3Di Models and Simulations panel, click *Simulate*. An overview is given of all running simulations for your organisation(s). Here you can follow the progress of your simulation.

.. TODO: to acces the results.. (dit nog toevoegen aan deze tutorial?)

Running a simulation with 3Di Live
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It is also possible to simulate your model with 3Di Live:

#) Go to `3di.live <https://www.3di.live/>`_.

#) Find your model. It will be available under the name you gave it, followed by the revision number. Click *Start*.

> #) Zoom into your channel (blue line) and potential breach (brown line).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#) Zoom to your channel (blue line) and potential breach (brown line).
```

#) Click the Play button at the top centre to start the simulation.

> #) You can open a breach by clicking on the breach and clicking on the settings button. You can adjust the breach settings when your simulation is paused.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#) You can open a breach by clicking the potential breach and clicking the settings button. You can adjust the breach settings when your simulation is paused.
```
